COMPUTER SCIENCE (Div III) 
Chair: Professor Stephen Freund 
Jeannie R Albrecht, Professor of Computer Science 
Daniel W. Barowy, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
James M. Bern, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
Rohit Bhattacharya, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
Stephen N. Freund, Chair and A. Barton Hepburn Professor of Computer Science 
Mark Hopkins, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
Iris Howley, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
Bill K. Jannen, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
Katie A. Keith, Assistant Professor of Computer Science 
Samuel McCauley, Assistant Professor of Computer Science; on leave 2022-2023 
Kelly A. Shaw, Professor of Computer Science 
Shikha Singh, Assistant Professor of Computer Science; on leave 2022-2023 
Aaron M. Williams, Associate Professor of Computer Science; on leave Spring 2023 
Computers and computation are pervasive in our society. They play enormously important roles in areas as diverse as education, science, business, and the arts. Understanding the nature of computation and exploring the great potential of computers are the goals of the discipline of computer science. A sample of the areas of research investigated by the Williams Department of Computer Science alone illustrates the vast range topics that are of interest to computer scientists and computing professionals today. This includes: the use of computer-generated graphic images in the arts and as a tool for visualization in the sciences and other areas; the protocols that make transmission of information over the Internet possible; the design of revolutionary new computer languages that simplify the process of constructing complex programs for computers; the development of machine learning algorithms that can extract useful and even novel information from data that is too complex for humans to analyze; algorithms that can solve problems that were previously too hard to solve in a reasonable amount of time, just by giving up a little bit of optimality in the solution; the investigation of machine architectures and specific hardware aimed at making computing fast. 
The department recognizes that students’ interests in computer science will vary widely. The department attempts to meet these varying interests through: (1) the major; (2) a selection of courses intended for those who are interested primarily in an introduction to computer science; (3) recommended course sequences for the non-major who wants a more extensive introduction to computer science in general or who seeks to develop some specific expertise in computing for application in some other discipline. 
MAJOR: The goal of the major is to provide an understanding of algorithmic problem solving as well as the conceptual organization of computers complex programs running on them. Emphasis is placed on the fundamental principles of computer science, building upon the mathematical theoretical ideas underlying these principles. The introductory and core courses build a broad and solid base for understanding computer more advanced courses allow students to sample a variety of specialized areas including graphics, artificial intelligence, computer networks, compiler design, human computer interaction, distributed systems, and operating systems. Independent study and honors work opportunities for students to study and conduct research on topics of special interest. 
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS Required Courses in Computer Science: A minimum of 8 courses is required in Computer Science, including the following: 
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS Introductory Courses: Computer Science 134 Introduction to Computer Science, Computer Science 136 Data Structures and Advanced Programming 
MAJOR REQUIREMENTS Core Courses: Computer Science 237 Computer Organization, Computer Science 256 Algorithm Design and Analysis, Computer Science 334 Principles of Programming Languages, Computer Science 361 Theory of Computation 
Elective Courses: Two or more electives (bringing the total number of Computer Science courses to at least 8) chosen from 300- or 400-level courses in Computer Science. Computer Science courses with 9 as the middle digit (reading, research, and thesis courses) will normally not be used to satisfy the elective requirements. Students may petition the department to waive this restriction with good reason.
Required Courses in Mathematics: Any Mathematics or Statistics course at the 200-level or higher except for MATH 200
Required Proficiency in Discrete Mathematics: Students must demonstrate proficiency in discrete mathematics by either passing the departmental Discrete Mathematics Proficiency Exam or by earning a grade of C- or better in MATH 200. This requirement must be met by the end of the sophomore year.
Required Proficiency in Discrete Mathematics: The Discrete Mathematics Proficiency Exam may be taken at most twice and cannot be taken beyond the sophomore year. The exam may not be used to fulfill the requirement for a student who has taken the course pass/fail or who has received a letter grade below C- in Math 200.
Required Proficiency in Discrete Mathematics: Students considering pursuing a major in Computer Science are urged to take Computer Science 134 and to begin satisfying their mathematics requirements early. Note in particular that the Discrete Mathematics Proficiency requirement is a prerequisite for many advanced courses
Students who take Computer Science 102T, 103, or 104 prior to Fall 2023 may use that course as one of the two electives required for the major in Computer Science. Those classes cannot be counted toward the major if taken in Fall 2023 or later semesters. Computer Science 102T, 103, 104, and 134 are not open to students who have taken a Computer Science course numbered 136 or higher.
To be eligible for admission to the major, a student must have completed at least two Computer Science courses, including Computer Science 136, as well as fulfilled the Discrete Mathematics Proficiency Requirement by the end of the sophomore year. A Mathematics course at the 200-level or higher (except for MATH 200) must be completed by the end of the junior year. Students are urged to have completed two of the four core courses (Computer Science 237, 256, 334, and 361) by the end of the sophomore year and must normally have completed at least three out of the four core courses by the end of the junior year.
We encourage students to be intellectually engaged in our field beyond the formal structure of courses. As such, all computer science majors must attend at least twenty Computer Science colloquia. Juniors and seniors are encouraged to attend at least five during each semester they are present on campus. Prospective majors in their first and second years are also encouraged to attend. A student studying away on a program approved by the International Education and Study Away Office will receive four colloquium credits for each semester away, up to a total of eight credits.
With the advance permission of the department, two appropriate mathematics or statistics courses may be substituted for one Computer Science elective. Appropriate mathematics classes are those numbered 300 or above, and appropriate statistics courses are those numbered 200 or above. Other variations in the required courses, adapting the requirements to the special needs and interests of the individual student, may be arranged in consultation with the department.
LABORATORY FACILITIES: The Computer Science Department maintains five departmental computer laboratories for students taking Computer Science courses, as well as a lab that can be configured for teaching specialized topics such as robotics. The workstations in these laboratories also support student and faculty research in computer science.
The degree with honors in Computer Science is awarded to students who have demonstrated outstanding intellectual achievement in a program of study extending beyond the requirements of the regular major. The principal considerations in recommending a student for the degree with honors will be: mastery of core material, ability to pursue independent study of computer science, originality in methods of investigation, and creativity in research. Honors study is highly recommended for those students with strong academic records in computer science who wish to attend graduate school, pursue high-level industrial positions in computing, or who would simply like to experience research in computer science.
Prospective honors students are urged to consult with their departmental advisor at the time of registration in the spring of the sophomore or at the beginning of the junior year to arrange a program of study that could lead to the degree with honors. Such a program normally consists of Computer Science 493 and 494 and a WSP of independent research under the guidance of a Computer Science faculty member, culminating in a thesis that is judged acceptable by the department. The program produces a significant piece of written work and often includes a major computer program. All honors candidates are required to give an oral presentation of their research in the Computer Science Colloquium in early spring semester.
Students considering honors work should obtain permission from the department before registering in the fall of the senior year. Formal admission to candidacy occurs at the beginning of the spring semester of the senior year and is based on promising performance in the fall semester and winter study units of honors work. Recommendations for the degree with honors will be made for outstanding performance in the three honors courses. Highest honors will be recommended for students who have displayed exceptional ability, achievement, or originality.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES: The department offers a choice of introductory courses; Computer Science 102 The Socio-Techno Web, 103 Electronic Textiles, 104 Data Science and Computation for All, and 134 Introduction to Computer Science.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES: Computer Science 134 provides an introduction to computer science with a focus on developing computer programming skills. These skills are essential to most upper-level courses in the department. As a result, Computer Science 134 together with Computer Science 136, are required as a prerequisite to most advanced courses in the department. Those students intending to take several Computer Science courses are urged to take 134 early.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES: Those students interested in learning more about exciting new ideas in computer science, but not necessarily interested in developing extensive programming skills, should consider Computer Science 102 The Socio-Techno Web, 103 Electronic Textiles, or 104 Data Science and Computation for All.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES: Students with significant programming experience should consider electing Computer Science 136 (see “Advanced Placement” below). Please see https://csci.williams.edu/placement-for-introductory-computer-science-classes/ for a more details on selecting among our classes.
INTRODUCTORY COURSES: Students are always welcome to contact a member of the department for guidance in selecting a first course.
COMPUTER SCIENCE 134: Introduction to Computer Science covers fundamental concepts in the design, implementation and testing of computer programs including loops, conditionals, functions, elementary data types and recursion. There is a strong focus on constructing correct, understandable and efficient programs in a structured language such as Java or Python.
STUDY ABROAD: Study abroad can be a wonderful experience. Students who hope to take computer science courses while abroad should discuss their plans in advance with the chair of the department or the departmental study away advisor. Students who plan to study away but do not expect to take courses toward the major should work with the department to create a plan to ensure that they will be able to complete the major. While study abroad is generally not an impediment to completing the major, students should be aware that certain computer science courses must be taken in a particular sequence and that not all courses are offered every semester (or every year). Students who wish to discuss their plans are invited to meet with any of the faculty in Computer Science.
Students MUST contact departments/programs BEFORE assuming study away credit will be granted toward the major or concentration.
Can your department or program typically pre-approve courses for major/concentration credit? Yes, in some cases, if appropriate course information is available in advance (e.g. syllabi and/or course descriptions), though students should be sure to contact the department.
What criteria will typically be used/required to determine whether a student may receive major/concentration credit for a course taken while on study away? Course title and description, and complete syllabus, including readings and assignments.
Does your department/program place restrictions on the number of major/concentration credits that a student might earn through study away? Yes. Typically no more than two CSCI courses and one Math course.
Does your department/program place restrictions on the types of courses that can be awarded credit towards your major? No.
Are there specific major requirements that cannot be fulfilled while on study away? No.
Are there specific major requirements in your department/program that students should be particularly aware of when weighing study away options? (Some examples might include a required course that is always taught in one semester, laboratory requirements.) Yes. Many CSCI electives are not taught every year. Students should develop a plan to complete all major requirements and discuss them with the department prior to going abroad.
Give examples in which students thought or assumed that courses taken away would count toward the major or concentration and then learned they wouldn’t: Students must have courses pre-approved prior to going abroad to ensure they meet the curricular goals and standards of the department
ADVANCED PLACEMENT: Students with an extensive background in computer science are urged to take the Advanced Placement Examination in Computer Science. A score of 4 or better on the AP Computer Science A exam is normally required for advanced placement in Computer Science 136.
ADVANCED PLACEMENT: Students who wish to be placed in Computer Science 136 but who have not taken the Advanced Placement Examination should consult with the department. Such students should have had a good course in computer science using a structured language such as Java or Python.
PLANS OF STUDY FOR NON-MAJORS: The faculty in Computer Science believes that students can substantially enrich their academic experience by completing a coherent plan of study in one or more disciplines outside of their majors. With this in mind, we have attempted to provide students majoring in other departments with options in our department’s curriculum ranging from two-course sequences to collections of courses equivalent to what would constitute a minor at institutions that recognize such a concentration. Students interested in designing such a plan of study are invited to discuss their plans in detail with a member of the faculty. To assist students making such plans, we include some suggestions below.
PLANS OF STUDY FOR NON-MAJORS: Students seeking to develop an extensive knowledge of computer science without majoring in the department are encouraged to use the major requirements as a guide. In particular, the four core courses required of majors are intended to provide a broad knowledge of topics underlying all of computer science. Students seeking a concentration in Computer Science are urged to complete at least two of these courses followed by one of our upper-level electives. Such a program would typically require the completion of a total of five Computer Science courses in addition to the Discrete Mathematics Proficiency requirement.
PLANS OF STUDY FOR NON-MAJORS: There are several sequences of courses appropriate for those primarily interested in developing skills in programming for use in other areas. For general programming, Computer Science 134 followed by 136 and 256 will provide students with a strong background in algorithm and data structure design together with an understanding of issues of correctness and efficiency. Students of the Bioinformatics program are encouraged to take Computer Science 134 at a minimum, and should also consider Computer Science 136 and 256. The sequence of courses Computer Science 109 and 134 would provide sufficient competence in computer graphics for many students interested in applying such knowledge either in the arts or sciences.
PLANS OF STUDY FOR NON-MAJORS: There are, of course, many other alternatives. We encourage interested students to consult with the department chair or other members of the department’s faculty.
Divisional Requirements: All Computer Science courses may be used to satisfy the Division III distribution requirement.
Alternate Year Courses: Computer Science 102, 103, 104, and our electives are each usually offered at least every other year. All other Computer Science courses are normally offered every year.
Course Numbering: The increase from 100, through 200 and 300, to 400 indicates in most instances an increasing level of maturity in the subject that is expected of students. Within a series, numeric order does not indicate the relative level of difficulty of courses. Rather, the middle digit of the course number (particularly in upper-level courses) generally indicates the area of computer science covered by the course.
Course Descriptions: Brief descriptions of the courses in Computer Science can be found below. More detailed information on the offerings in the department is available at http://www.cs.williams.edu/.
Courses Open on a Pass-Fail Basis: Students taking a Computer Science course on a pass-fail basis must meet all the requirements set for students taking the course on a graded basis.
Courses Open on a Pass-Fail Basis: With the permission of the department, any course offered by the department may be taken pass-fail (with the exception of tutorials), though courses graded with the pass-fail option may not be used to satisfy any of the major or honors requirements. However, with the permission of the department, courses taken in the department beyond those requirements may be taken on a pass-fail basis.
